Controls:



WASD / Arrow Keys -> Up/down is forward/backward; left/right is strafe  

Space, Ctrl -> Vertically up/down (with respect to the planet's surface)  

Shift -> Boost



\---



\## Overview



This is a raymarching project that compiles a bunch of the stuff I learned regarding raymarching, procedural generation, and rendering techniques over the last few weeks.



\## SDF Rendering



The basic idea behind the 3-dimensional rendering is to imagine the 2D sprite/rect as a screen oriented in 3D space. For this, the UVs are first converted to clip space (`vec2(-1, -1)` to `vec2(1, 1)`), then, using uniforms, a ray direction associated with each fragment can be generated. I used `screen\_coord`, `screen\_dir`, and `screen\_up` uniforms, which encode the world-space position of the center of the screen, the normal direction of the screen, and the up direction of the screen respectively. These can then be modified via GDScript at runtime to simulate the player/camera moving through space.



SDF rendering is done by marching the ray through space based on the initial ray direction, taking the distance estimate at each step and marching forward by at most that distance - this is sphere tracing, and ensures the ray doesn't clip into any implicit geometry. As I'm using noise and textures to generate some of the geometry, this distance estimate isn't exact, thus a conservative step size is used (anywhere from `0.6 - 0.9`) over the calculated step size. Finally, a binary traceback is done to find the exact surface intersection (although this only results in marginal improvements). There are still some precision issues which result in geometry disappearing at certain angles as the ray clips through - the conservative step size can be reduced to fix this at the cost of performance.



There are some optimization techniques used, mainly analytical ray-sphere intersections to determine ray travel distances and cull unnecessary travel. LODs are used based on travelled distance, and lower LODs are used depending on the type of ray (for example, shadow rays use lower LODs after only a couple of steps).



\## Base Planet



The base planet is formed by an intersection operation of a sphere with 3D noise. The 3D noise is generated by Godot's FastNoiseLite, with Ridged FBM to allow natural-looking tunnels underwater. I'm sampling the 3D noise with a threshold formula like so —



```cpp

distance\_estimate = (noise\_value - min\_threshold) / (threshold\_range)

```



For small threshold ranges, this allows the distance estimate to go above `1` in open spaces, without too much clipping/flickering artefacts. This does require a conservative step factor (about `0.9 \* distance\_estimate`) to ensure the ray doesn't clip through too much, but I've observed this works better than a simple `step()` or `smoothstep()` of the noise. Of course, tunnels can also be made with triply periodic functions like the gyroid function, but this looks a bit more natural.



Some 2D Ridged FBM Perlin noise is sampled like a heightmap to make the mountains. Finally, the entire terrain is "rounded" - generally, rounding can be done by subtracting a small value (`d`) from the distance estimate, and here I'm using a triplanar-mapped rock texture as `d` to carve out the terrain uniformly in an interesting way.



\## Atmosphere



The atmosphere is rendered after the terrain pass, with an analytical ray-sphere intersection test to find the ray path through the atmosphere. The basic technique is to march the ray a fixed number of steps, calculating the local density (function of height), transmittance (function of distance travelled - Beer's law), phase function (constant for a given ray direction), and sunlight transmittance (optical depth - requires a separate raymarch towards the sun direction, accumulating light based again on Beer's law). The final colour of the atmosphere is given by the sum (integral) of the in-scattering at every point. At this step, we can also apply Beer's law on the net distance travelled by the ray to get the transmittance of the terrain colour - which simulates atmospheric fog. This is very much referenced from Sebastian Lague's video, where it's explained very thoroughly.



\*\*Note:\*\* In the Beer's law exponentiation term, a scattering coefficient is multiplied to simulate realistic wavelength scattering. These coefficients can be changed to alter the atmosphere's colour throughout the day, like having blue sunsets and red noons.



\## Clouds



The clouds are a similar sort of volumetric marching, but the in-scattering is anisotropic and uses a complicated-looking Henyey-Greenstein phase function with multiple-octave scattering (it just works, I don't understand the exact theory). The basic transmittance is again given by Beer's law, although there is another approach outlined in the Horizon Zero Dawn cloud rendering presentation, where a modified Beer's Powder equation can be used to darken the edges of clouds as well.



```cpp

transmittance = exp(-t) - exp(-2t)

```



The cloud noise sampling is also a little bit of a challenge, as sampling 3D noise is very inefficient. The ray traversal through the cloud layer is again calculated analytically. I used a hacky trick to reduce the repetitiveness of clouds while also sampling the noise only once per step, by taking different values from the RGB channels to sort of emulate FBM. Ideally, different frequencies of noise should be packed in each channel (as proposed by the HZD presentation), but FastNoiseLite doesn't support this as far as I know. I could supply this noise from GDScript by combining 3 different 3D noises at the start of the scene, but I'm not sure exactly how to do that (maybe possible with compute shaders).



\*\*Note:\*\* The cloud pass happens before the atmosphere, which lends some nice atmospheric perspective to the clouds.



\## Ocean



The ocean raymarch is definitely a conditional nightmare, and a lot of possible paths are evaluated. Rays split when entering/exiting the surface into reflected and refracted rays, and all rays going above the surface must then again evaluate terrain, atmosphere, and clouds. In my implementation, I divide up the raymarch into an underwater and above-water pass, with the latter being skippable if no ray exits the surface. If the ray is to exit the surface (via refraction/reflection), the point of exit and direction are set depending on when and where it happens. The ocean surface normal is given by:



```cpp

normalize(p - planet\_centre)

```



plus some perturbation with a noise texture, and as the surface is distorted, above-water rays always sample with very low LODs. Finally, another conditional check applies the ocean colour depending on whether the camera is underwater or above water.



For the underwater pass, I used the basic atmospheric transmittance algorithm, but the in-scattering is much simpler and just a function of the water depth and time of day. This is definitely not energy-conserving lol.



There are a couple of additional tricks used to make the underwater look cool (there's an easter egg somewhere underwater). I used scrolling noise with spherical UVs to emulate caustics on shallow seafloors. I also take the distance estimate of the terrain, and if it's below a threshold, the sea surface is turned white to simulate foam/waves near landmasses. A sine of the distance modified with `TIME` gives simple waves, and another scrolling noise is used to texture it.



\## Stars



Stars are sampled by a cubemap texture. Their visibility is determined both by a time-of-day mask, and the time-of-day mask is further masked by an atmospheric height mask - basically, stars are visible all the time if high above, and only during evening/night if near the surface.



\## Post Processing



Post-processing in a fragment shader is a very hacky process, as multiple passes aren't really supported out of the box - thus it's simulated using SubViewports and TextureRects. I followed a couple of steps to get the necessary data for post-processing from my base fragment shader.



The main shader is rendered at a lower resolution (`1280 × 720`) within a SubViewport of the same size, then rendered onto a full-resolution TextureRect. I wanted to do screen-space god rays, which require an occlusion mask. To do this, the occlusion data (which is simple enough to collect - if a ray hits terrain/clouds, occlusion happens) is packed into the alpha channel of the main shader. Then, in the TextureRect, the alpha value is sampled for proper occlusion, and the final alpha is set to `1`.



There's also a lens flare effect, for which a downsampled render is required - another very hacky method. A second SubViewport at very low resolution has a TextureRect, which takes the base render and strips the alpha channel, and finally the main TextureRect samples this second SubViewport for a downsampled render. It's not really necessary to downsample beyond getting better performance and some automatic blurring.



For both effects, screen-space raymarching is used, which results in banding artefacts. To fix this, I learned that jittering the sample UV with blue noise is an easy fix. This also helps with the downsampling artefacts.



\---



\## Credits and Resources



\### Sebastian Lague's Videos



https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4QOcCGI6xOU  

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DxfEbulyFcY



\### Aria's Raymarching Video



https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5J-0sy2pu\_8\&t=836s



\### Inigo Quilez's Articles



https://iquilezles.org  

https://iquilezles.org/articles/distfunctions/  

https://iquilezles.org/articles/outdoorslighting/  

https://iquilezles.org/articles/rmshadows/  

https://iquilezles.org/articles/terrainmarching/



\### SimonDev's Cloud Rendering Video



https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Qj\_tK\_mdRcA



\### Horizon Zero Dawn Cloud Rendering



https://www.guerrilla-games.com/read/the-real-time-volumetric-cloudscapes-of-horizon-zero-dawn



\### Screen-Space God Rays



https://developer.nvidia.com/gpugems/gpugems3/part-ii-light-and-shadows/chapter-13-volumetric-light-scattering-post-process



\### Screen-Space Lens Flare



https://john-chapman.github.io/2017/11/05/pseudo-lens-flare.html



\### Stars Cubemap



https://svs.gsfc.nasa.gov/4851/



Converted the panorama texture to a cubemap with this online tool:



https://jaxry.github.io/panorama-to-cubemap/



\### Blue Noise Textures



https://github.com/Calinou/free-blue-noise-textures

